enhancements/installer/component-selection: Catch up with landed API (#1109)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/installer/component-selection.md

---

> title: component-selection-during-instaauthors:

Author: Fixed the accidental deletion in 241e8d96 -> 8f802c4f.

* Admins can easily explicitly exclude specific "optional" components from their cluster, at install time.
* Admins can enable a previously excluded optional component, at runtime.

> * Install wrappers like assisted-installer can define an install-config that excludes specific components

Author: they cannot exclude specific components, because we ditched the exclusion property.  They can include explicit caps, on top of whatever comes in their baseline set.

> * Install wrappers like assisted-installer can define an install-config that excludes specific components

Reviewer: i think maybe you're being too literal.

the assisted installer can define an install-config in which the net result of using that install-config will be that the installed cluster has excluded some well understood capabilities.

e.g. they can set CapSet=None, enable=x,y,z.  Which, yeah, it's not "excluding" other caps explicitly, but essentially it is excluding the rest of the caps.

and that was the point of the goal, that they could achieve that end.

> * Install wrappers like assisted-installer can define an install-config that excludes specific components

Author: I've pushed 669cc72d -> ed81a86b to restore this line, and extend it with:

> ... (by asking for components they do want, possibly an empty set)

to make it clear that the exclusion mechanism is now "ask for what you want" and no longer "list some things you don't want".

#### Manifest annotations

Formalizing a concept of a "capability" annotation which allows a given resource to be excluded based
on installer input. For example the console related resources could be annotated as

```yaml
annotations:
  capability.openshift.io/name: console
```

If a resource participates in multiple capabilities, it should specify all capabilities as plus-sign separated
values in the annotation(e.g. `capability.openshift.io/name=console+monitoring`).  The resource will only be 
included if all the capabilities on the resource are enabled.  This allows a component
to define a `ServiceMonitor` which is part of both the `monitoring` capability and the `Foo` capability.  If
either of those capabilities are excluded, the `ServiceMonitor` should not be created.  (If `monitoring` is excluded
then no ServiceMonitors should be created, if only `Foo` is excluded, then only Foo's ServiceMonitors should be
excluded while ServiceMonitors associated with other capabilities would not be).

To determine which manifests are managed for a given cluster, the CVO will:

1. Start with all the manifests in the payload.

> 2. Remove all the manifests that have no annotations.

Author: [We do][1].  Although if you wanted, you could read this step as a special case of the cluster-profile exclusion.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/f2c20ff2ad2771dd39c1482658f18c2587da6469/pkg/manifest/manifest.go#L123-L126

> 2. Remove all the manifests that have no annotations.

Reviewer: oh right, because they *all* have at least the cluster profile annotation.  Do we even have any manifests that don't have an annotation?  I assume not since it would do nothing.

> 2. Remove all the manifests that have no annotations.

Reviewer: (might be worth clarifying that most/all manifests do have at least one annotation, due to cluster profiles.  Otherwise this reads like we're going to remove all the manifests that don't have a capability annotation)

> 2. Remove all the manifests that have no annotations.

Author: > Do we even have any manifests that don't have an annotation?

We do: [CredentialRequests for platforms where there is no in-cluster cloud-cred-operator management][1].

> ... might be worth clarifying that most/all manifests do have at least one annotation, due to cluster profiles...

Seemed simpler to just drop this line, rely on the profiles check listed here to cover unannotated manifests, and treat the current `Manifest.Include` check as an internal optimization, so I've pushed ed81a86b -> aea25fe1 to drop this line.

[1]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CCO-210

> 3. If an exclusion identifier is set, remove all the manifests with the exclusion annotation `exclude.release.openshift.io/{exclusionID}=true`.

Author: A bit of this happened as a short-term IBM-y hack openshift/cluster-version-operator#269, without going through the enhancement process (possibly from before we had an enhancement process), and we've been [dragging it around since then][1] as undocumented cruft.  Would be good to drop it if possible.  I'm also fine dropping this line here to keep the cruft less documented ;)

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/f2c20ff2ad2771dd39c1482658f18c2587da6469/pkg/manifest/manifest.go#L128-L133

> 3. If an exclusion identifier is set, remove all the manifests with the exclusion annotation `exclude.release.openshift.io/{exclusionID}=true`.

Reviewer: oh, right this is the other exclusion stuff....   ok.  i dunno how many people will read this and think the "exclusion identifier" refers to capability exclusion, like I did.

might be worth a clarification.

> 3. If an exclusion identifier is set, remove all the manifests with the exclusion annotation `exclude.release.openshift.io/{exclusionID}=true`.

Author: I've just dropped this line with aea25fe1 -> 5f94ef77.  It's old, niche cruft, which we may not even care about anymore, and a larger explanation seemed like it would be distracting without adding significant value to folks looking to understand how caps work.  The presence of cluster-profile and tech-preview filtering is enough to get the "there are other types of manifest filters around", and folks don't need to get caught up in the details of all of those mechanisms here.

Developers who are interested in all the knobs we're supporting in manifests should be looking [here][1], and not just in this subsection of the caps proposal.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/e6be674880cb8361e1bb45bcba6b4ed753cbbac1/dev-guide/cluster-version-operator/dev/operators.md#manifest-inclusion-annotations

> 4. If TechPreviewNoUpgrade is not set, [remove all the manifets with `release.openshift.io/feature-gate=TechPreviewNoUpgrade`](../update/cvo-techpreview-manifests.md).

Author: Fixed the `manifets` typo in 241e8d96 -> 8f802c4f.

5. Remove all the manifests that lack [`include.release.openshift.io/{profile}=true`](../update/cluster-profiles.md).
6. Remove all the manifests that declare a capability in `capability.openshift.io/name` which is not part of the current enabled capabilities.

#### Install configuration

Defining an [install config api](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/790048166067273d34f76bea4220fa395b1cce1b/pkg/types/installconfig.go#L70) field whereby the user can opt into specific capabilities.

```yaml
capabilities:
  baselineCapabilitySet: None
  additionalEnabledCapabilities:
  - openshift-samples
```

> Specifying an unrecognized capability name is an error condition.

Author: Mentioned both typoed caps and typoed cap sets in 241e8d96 -> 8f802c4f.

Note: The CVO must wait until the ClusterVersion resource exists (created by the installer) before creating
any filterable resource (a resource with a capability annotation) to ensure there is no race condition in which
the CVO starts creating resources that should have been filtered, before it has the filter list.

##### Capabilities can be installed

Admins can adjust `spec.capabilities` to request additional capabilities, and the CVO will extend `enabledCapabilities` and begin reconciling [the newly-enabled manifests](#manifest-annotations).

##### Capabilities cannot be uninstalled

Admins can adjust `spec.capabilities` to stop requesting a capability, but the CVO will refuse, continue to hold that capability in `enabledCapabilities`, and continue to reconcile [the associated manifests](#manifest-annotations).
When the requested `spec.capabilities` diverge from `enabledCapabilities`, the CVO will set `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True` in ClusterVersion's `status.conditions` with a message pointing out the divergence.

Removing installed components is complicated, and we are deferring that for now.

> We will [consider][admission-webhook] adding an admission webhook to improve the UX for admins who attempt to remove an enabled capability, by replacing "notice `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True`" with "have your PATCH fail with a 400".

Author: > so if you want to see the list of implicitly enabled caps on your cluster, you have to look at the message associated w/ the condition?

Yes.

>  (that's ok, I guess, but i missed something because i had thought it was going to be an explicit status field that listed them)

If we'd decided that, I didn't get it captured in openshift/api@5b82635ef101e7c10b5fcbbcfb81315bb7a0da20.  Can you point me at discussion?  It seems like one of the things where we can look at `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True` prevalence and use that to inform a decision about whether the structured status would be impactful enough to bother.

> We will [consider][admission-webhook] adding an admission webhook to improve the UX for admins who attempt to remove an enabled capability, by replacing "notice `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True`" with "have your PATCH fail with a 400".

Reviewer: sorry i can't point to a discussion (in that i can't even begin to think what that slack search string would be, nevermind whether there actually was one or i am thinking of something else/misunderstood the discussion).  As you say, we can add it later, so we can go with this and see if we get complaints.

###### Updates

During updates, resources may move from being associated with one capability, to another, or move
from being part of the core (always installed) to being part of an optional capability.  In such cases,
the governing logic is that once a resource has been applied to a cluster, it must continue to be
applied to the cluster (unless it is removed from the payload entirely, of course).  Furthermore,
if any resource from a given capability is applied to a cluster, all other resources from that
capability must be applied to the cluster, even if the cluster configuration would otherwise filter
out that capability.  These are referred to as implicitly enabled capabilities and the purpose is to

> avoid scenarios like this that would break cluster functionality:

Author: Yup.  In 241e8d96 -> 8f802c4f, I've underlined that with a new:

```markdown
As in [the general case](#capabilities-cannot-be-uninstalled), when the requested `spec.capabilities` diverge from `enabledCapabilities`, the CVO will set `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True` in ClusterVersion's `status.conditions` with a message pointing out the divergence.
```

3. A new version of OCP moves the registry resources into an optional capability.
4. Either:
  * During upgrade the registry resources are not applied to the cluster because the registry capability is not enabled, or
  * During upgrade, the existing registry resources continue to be applied (because we have a rule that says once a resource is applied, we will continue to reconcile it in future versions).
  But new registry resources added to the payload are not applied because they are filtered due to the registry capability not being enabled, resulting in critical registry resources not being applied and the registry potentially breaking.

This scenario is avoided by specifying that once a resource is applied to a cluster, it will
always be reconciled in future versions, and that if any part of a capability is present,
the entire capability will be present.

This means the CVO must apply the following logic:

1. For the outgoing payload, find all manifests that are [currently included](#manifest-annotations).
2. For the new payload, find all the manifests that would be included, in the absence of capability filtering.
3. Match manifests using group, kind, namespace, and name.

> 4. Union all capabilities from matched manifests with the set of previously-enabled capabilities to compute the new enabled capability set.

Author: Also covered [in this thread][1], but the idea is that we have some logic for calculating the enabled cap set (must contain all the previously enabled caps!  Must contain update-tainted caps!).  This section is covering the update-tainting.

Once you have an enabled cap set, there's generic logic for "how do you report divergence between the current request and the actual value?".  Hopefully [the new line][1] makes this logic clearer in the enhancement.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1109#discussion_r866356188

Capabilities must be [registered in the API][capability-registry].

* 4.11
  * baremetal
  * marketplace
  * openshift-samples
* Maybe later:
  * console
  * imageregistry
  * csi-*
  * insights
  * monitoring
  * ???

#### Capability sets

Capability sets must be [registered in the API][capability-set-registry].

* `None`: an empty set enabling no optional capabilities.
* `v4.11`: the recommended set of optional capabilities to enable for the 4.11 version of OpenShift.
  This list will remain the same no matter which version of OpenShift is installed.
* `vCurrent`: the recommended set of optional capabilities to enable for the cluster current version of OpenShift.
  For a 4.11 cluster, this matches `v4.11`.  We may add or remove capabilities from this set in 4.12 clusters.

Admins who want to pre-emptively exclude future capabilities can use `None` or `v4.11` or another `baselineCapabilitySet` which will not evolve with time.

We may decide to add additional sets like `v4.12` or `myGreatUseCase` in the future, but do not commit to doing so.

#### Manifest annotations

Formalizing a concept of a "capability" annotation which allows a given resource to be excluded based

> on installer input. For example the console related resources could be annotated as

Reviewer 2: This gives an impression that marking  a manifest part of a capability will make installer exclude it. Which is not true.

Reviewer: how does it give that impression?  it says it allows the resource to be excluded via (config) input to the installer.

it doesn't say the resource will be excluded, and it doesn't say the installer will exclude it.

Reviewer 2: Here is my suggestion `Formalizing a concept of a "capability" annotation  gives the ability to exclude the given resource based on installer input`

Author: Ben and I are fine either way, so going with Lala's wording in 7907bdc8 -> 7b7d1c9a.

```yaml
capabilities:
  baselineCapabilitySet: None
  additionalEnabledCapabilities:
  - openshift-samples
```

Specifying an unrecognized capability or capability set name is an error condition.

The installer will validate the pass the information through to the CVO for resource management, by setting [`spec.capabilities` in ClusterVersion](#resource-management).

#### Resource management

The CVO will grow new `capabilities` properties in `spec` and `status`.
This is distinct from `overrides` because `overrides` put the cluster in an unsupported state.

The `spec` property uses the same structure as [the install-config](#install-configuration):

```yaml
  spec:
    capabilities:
      baselineCapabilitySet: None
      additionalEnabledCapabilities:
      - openshift-samples
```

The CVO will calculate an effective status:

```yaml
  status:
    capabilities:
      enabledCapabilities:
      - openshift-samples
      knownCapabilities:
      - baremetal
      - marketplace
      - openshift-samples
```

> `knownCapabilities` can inform users of available but not currently enabled capabilities (e.g. web-console checkboxes for "do you want to enable these additional capabilities?").

Reviewer 2: I do not think this is true.  `knownCapabilities` should list all known capabilities and should not exclude the currently enabled capabilities  
```
$ oc get -o json clusterversion version | jq '{spec: (.spec | {capabilities}), status: (.status | {capabilities})}'
  {
    "spec": {
      "capabilities": {
        "baselineCapabilitySet": "None",
        "additionalEnabledCapabilities": [
          "openshift-samples"
        ],
      },
    },
    "status": {
      "capabilities": {
        "enabledCapabilities": [
          "openshift-samples"
        ],
        "knownCapabilities": [
          "baremetal",
          "marketplace",
          "openshift-samples"
        ]
      }
    }
  }
```

Reviewer: rephase to `can inform users of all capabilities the cluster understands regardless of whether they are enabled or not` should resolve this.

Author: I've pushed 5f94ef77 -> 523c93d5 with:

```diff
-`knownCapabilities` can inform users of available but not currently enabled capabilities (e.g. web-console checkboxes for "do you want to enable these additional capabilities?").
-
+`knownCapabilities` includes all known capabilities, regardless of whether they are enabled or not.
+Removing `enabledCapabilities` from `knownCapabilities` will give the set of available but not currently enabled capabilities (e.g. web-console checkboxes for "do you want to enable these additional capabilities?").
```

the governing logic is that once a resource has been applied to a cluster, it must continue to be
applied to the cluster (unless it is removed from the payload entirely, of course).  Furthermore,
if any resource from a given capability is applied to a cluster, all other resources from that
capability must be applied to the cluster, even if the cluster configuration would otherwise filter
out that capability.  These are referred to as implicitly enabled capabilities and the purpose is to
avoid scenarios like this that would break cluster functionality:

1. Initially, registry resources are part of core (not defined in a capability).
2. A cluster is installed, registry resources are applied to the cluster, admin chooses to 
disable optional capabilities by default.
3. A new version of OCP moves the registry resources into an optional capability.
4. Either:
    * During upgrade the registry resources are not applied to the cluster because the registry capability is not enabled, or
    * During upgrade, the existing registry resources continue to be applied (because we have a rule that says once a resource is applied, we will continue to reconcile it in future versions).

>         But new registry resources added to the payload are not applied because they are filtered due to the registry capability not being enabled, resulting in critical registry resources not being applied and the registry potentially breaking.

Reviewer 2: We should restructure or rewrite `But new registry resources added to the payload are not applied because they are filtered due to the registry capability not being enabled, resulting in critical registry resources not being applied and the registry potentially breaking.` as this is confusing with respect to what you want to communicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Either way, new registry-related resources are not going to be applied because the registry capability is not explicitly enabled.  This can result in critical registry resources not being applied, which could break the (already enabled/running) registry.
```

?

Author: This is pre-existing wording:

```console
$ git show 523c93d595 | grep -3 'new registry resources added to'
-OR
-4b) during upgrade, the existing registry resources continue to be applied(because we have a rule
-that says once a resource is applied, we will continue to reconcile it in future versions), but
-new registry resources added to the payload are not applied because they are filtered due to the
-registry capability not being enabled, resulting in critical registry resources not being applied
-and the registry potentially breaking.
-```
--
+4. Either:
+    * During upgrade the registry resources are not applied to the cluster because the registry capability is not enabled, or
+    * During upgrade, the existing registry resources continue to be applied (because we have a rule that says once a resource is applied, we will continue to reconcile it in future versions).
+        But new registry resources added to the payload are not applied because they are filtered due to the registry capability not being enabled, resulting in critical registry resources not being applied and the registry potentially breaking.
 
 This scenario is avoided by specifying that once a resource is applied to a cluster, it will
 always be reconciled in future versions, and that if any part of a capability is present,
```

Did you have a particular rephrasing you're looking for?

Reviewer 2: I like what @bparees suggested

Author: I think there is some benefit to sketching how things can go wrong in both the "we stop managing previously-managed resources and let them drift in-cluster" and "we continue managing previously-managed resources, but no longer manage new-to-the-cap resources".  But if it's confusing to explain those cases, we've already picked a direction, and going into the specifics of why we think that was a good direction is no longer all that interesting.  So I've dropped this list in 523c93d5 -> 7907bdc8.
